I was in the Bureau of Mines in the fairly early 30s.
At that time, we had a station in Pittsburgh. It was
on the grounds of the Kearney Institute up there,
and it was a comparatively small station. But
there was a man by the name of Storch. Oh, yes, H.H.
Storch. H.H. Storch and several of his associates
who had been, Lester Hurst, for example, who had
been doing laboratory work on coal hydrogenation
for a long, long time. And the publications on that
are still available. Many of them I have here. But
this was all really small-scale autoclave work.
It was, in essence, a duplication of a lot of the
research work that the Germans had carried out
before they built their plants in Germany. And
that work continued through the, until about
1940. In 1940,
I was transferred from experimental work to the
Washington office and became assistant director
of the fuels and explosive service under a man by
the name of Dr. Fielder. we probably haven't run
into on this yet. But he had a very active part in
really getting synthetic fuel work started in
Jeremiah. And about that time, the Secretary of
Interior, Harold Ickes, and his assistants
became interested in synthetic fuel work. And
then in 1941, as you remember, we got in the war with
Japan and the war with the European powers.
And
during that war, the Allies furnished most of the
oil for Europe because they were cut off from any
other sources of oil and they lost the Romanian oil
and so on and so forth.
Mike Strauss, who was then one of the assistant
secretaries, became very active with beer mines,
and as the war went on, about 1942 or 1943, he
proposed that the beer mines start a more vigorous
and enlarged program on synthetic fuels on the
basis that maybe at the end of the war we might need
synthetic fuels as a possible source for oil.
Thank you. The...
The Secretary's office got over to Congress, and
they talked to a number of congressmen. In
particular, we might mention Senator O'Mahony
from Wyoming and Congressman Randolph from West
Virginia. Congressman Randolph is now Senator
Randolph, by the way. And Murdoch. from Utah, and
Gurney, I don't remember his first name. I believe
he's from North Dakota. And what was his first
name, Edward? I forgot.
And these senators became interested. And then
the secretary's office suggested to Bureau of
Mines that we make a trip to, this was wartime by
then, it was about 1942. And they suggested that we
make a trip to England to study the coal
hydrogenation work that the English had done at
Billingham. And in fact, they had a sizable plant
operating at Billingham on the hydrogenation of
coal and tar. So H.H. Storch, Dr. Storch, and I went
to England and spent about a month with the English
people, mostly at Billingham and related
facilities. And they, very, very kind to us,
revealed much of the data they had accumulated on
building this big plant. And as a matter of fact,
the large plant was designed almost specifically
after the German coal hydrogenation plants. And
we came back to this country, and then the senators
thought that we should make a tour of a number of
states and begin to try to acquaint people in a
general way with not only with coal
hydrogenation, but with the Fischer-Tropsch
process as well. There were no Fischer-Tropsch
plants in existence outside of Germany at that
time, but we had a good deal of information about
the Fischer-Tropsch process and had worked on it
in the Bureau of Mines as well. So there was a
senatorial group got together and We went down to
West Virginia. We went to Pittsburgh. And they
gave speeches and talks. And then we went out west
to Sheridan, Wyoming, where Senator O'Mahony was
an influential man. And we went to Utah. And we
toured several other states, trying to generate
some interest in the synthetic floor. And as a
result of that, there was passed the Synthetic
Fuel Act. I believe it was of 1944, but don't hold me
to that. That's correct. It was 1944. And that
provided funds, up to a good many million dollars,
to investigate synthetic fuels. And about the
time this act was passed, we started work to build
laboratories at Brewston, Pennsylvania, which
is now called PERC, by the way, and the Morgantown
Laboratory at Morgantown, West Virginia, which
is now called MERC, M-E-R-C. And we built the
Louisiana, Missouri. Louisiana, Missouri is
about 85 miles north of St. Louis on the
Mississippi River. We started to build a
demonstration plant for the coal hydrogenation
operations and a smaller Fisher-Tropsch plant
for the Fisher-Tropsch operations. We also
undertook the building of the oil shale plant at
Rifle, Colorado, and built the laboratory at
Laramie, Wyoming, which is the oil shale
laboratory. All of that was really done under that
particular act. But as we began to go into our
development work on these projects, the war was
drawing to a close. And you asked me briefly about
the various teams that went over to Germany to
investigate the German industry. Now, there were
a good many of those teams dealing with chemicals
and various aspects of German industry. The one we
were interested in, of course, was called the oil
team, really, and dealt with oil and synthetic
fuels both. And I guess probably it comprised from
150 to 200 people, but not necessarily all at once.
I mean, they went at various times and they came
back at various times, so it was rather an
indeterminate group at any one time. But those
people were selected. They were largely either
from the government, mainly from the Bureau of
Mines or other groups in the government who had
been doing work with oil or synthetic fuels, or
they were from the oil industry itself, from
practically all the oil companies, all the major
oil companies certainly sent one or more people to
take part in these investigations. And there were
also people from some of the coal companies and
people from companies like coppers and so on and so
forth who had connections in foreign countries
and who had worked in this field in one way or
another. As I remember it, that organization went
along all during the latter part of 1944 and then
during the In the early part of 1945, during
January and February, various groups of these
individuals were transferred to London and then
from London went into the field to learn what we
could as soon as the German army was driven out of
the plants and we could get in and begin our
investigations.
As far as synthetic fuels is concerned, I will not
treat the oil industry because this is a different
topic, really, and I don't think we need to bring it
in at this point. As far as synthetic fuels was
concerned, we were particularly interested.
There were 12 coal hydrogenation plants, and I
suppose on the average they ran around 5,000 to
7,000 or 8,000 barrels a day. Not all these plants
were available because some were in the Russian
zones, but I guess we visited and studied about
eight of these cohydrogenation plants. And if my
memory serves correctly, there were about seven
Fischer-Tropsch plants. And I believe that we
visited essentially all of those. As I remember,
the fish and trophy plants were pretty much in the
zones that we could get at, so we also got a chance to
look at the fish and trophy plants. They were
smaller plants, in general running around 2,000
barrels a day of fuel.
Now, in addition to that, of course, As you know,
the Germans were always strong in coal
technology, and they had a group of laboratories
who had been doing coal technology work, I guess,
for 15 or 20 years. And we visited all those
laboratories and, in fact, tried to talk to all the
people that we knew of that had been instrumental
in coal work. And in addition to that, we visited a
lot of other concerns. For instance, people who
had been doing gasification work, like Lurgy. And
Lurgy had been interested in gasification, I
guess, since the early 1930s. And
then we visited people like Coppers,
Later on, developed the coprostatic process for
gasification, which you've probably heard
about. The
groups were divided up into sort of working teams,
and at any one time you might... You might have
involved in a team two people or four people or
probably six people, usually not many more than
that. And they were assigned targets, and they
selected these targets. By the way, I was in
general a leader of the team, although I wasn't
always in a position where I could do much leading
because I was in the field a lot. But we tried to
divide this work up and assign it to people who were
most knowledgeable in these fields. And the thing
evolved without any trouble at all because these
were highly skilled and highly knowledgeable
people, and they knew very much about what they
wanted to see when they went over there, and they
learned a great deal more. And so they in
themselves were capable of more or less picking
out their targets and going there and doing the
investigation. And we might spend... If it were a
laboratory or something like that, we might spend
two or three days at it. If it were a plant, we might
spend a week or more at it. And oftentimes, two or
three teams investigated various aspects of a
plant because... Excuse me, I'm going to let you
interrupt. Yeah, I have a couple of questions I
want to ask for my purposes. If you went into a
plant, you went completely through it
mechanically as well as checking its records?
Yes, we did. We tried to accumulate as much of the
records as we could. And wherever possible, we
made notes from those records. And in some cases,
we could get copies of the records. And all of those
things were compiled and brought back to London or
to Brussels. A lot of this work was done out of
Brussels. And each time we investigated a target,
we wrote a report out of it. It was a CIOS report,
chaos we often call it. Some people call it chaos,
but this was a matter of choice, I guess. And those
reports were all eventually brought back here.
They were compiled and edited by the Bureau of
Mines and various other groups, by the oil
industry and so on and so forth. And eventually,
the Department of Commerce set up a sort of a
central location that was to do printing and
reproduction of those, but what happened to all
those reports, I can't tell you. We have them all.
We have the BIOS, the SIOS, and the FIAT. Well, I'm
glad to know that, because I may need some of these
myself before this thing goes too far. What about
field notes? Did you save your field notes, I
wonder? Oh, no. As far as I know, we didn't. We wrote
final, what we called final reports, and as far as I
know, I never saved my field notes, and I don't know
if other people did save their field notes. This
accumulated to quite a lot of paper as time went on,
you know, and we were very limited. See, we were
working in the field, and houses were all torn
down, and we were living under very difficult and
strenuous conditions, and so on and so forth. Most
of our writing we did in Brussels and London,
really. Now, any other questions? Oh, yeah. Fire
away. Yes, I have a whole bunch. What first
interested you in synthetic fuels? Why are you in
the Bureau of Mines in 1939? That's awfully early
to be interested in synthetic fuels. Well, the
Bureau of Mines, as you probably know, was
originally established really to control and
investigate and guide and help the mining
industry And out of that grew a great desire to
improve and modify the utilization of coal. And
my first interest, actually, was in water
conditioning. But then I became more and more
immersed in hydrocarbon chemistry. By the time
1935 and 1936 was around, I was pretty much
involved with oil and coal chemistry.
Then I went in to work with Dr. Filner, and this was
the fuels and explosives service. I had little to
do with the explosive ends of it, but all of my work
was on the fuels ends, which included coal and
petroleum. I think at that time that there was
always a feeling in the Bureau of Mines that since
we had such enormous reserves of coal, and since we
didn't really know how much oil we had or even how
long those reserves might last, that we should
look forward and begin the investigation of coal
and particularly with the possibility of
converting coal to oil and gas. Now, I think at this
point you ought to understand one or two things
about the chemistry of coal. The difference
between coal and oil from the viewpoint of
ultimate analysis, that is the amount of carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen they contain, is that oil
runs around 8%, 10%, or 11% hydrogen, the rest of it
being mainly carbon, while coal is about half that
much hydrogen, the rest of it being mainly carbon,
but that there are other elements in coal like
sulfur and oxygen and ash and so on and so forth. So
the thought has always been, and this was true of
the Germans, and it was true of all the people in
Europe, and it was true of our own chemists here.
Our basic idea was that if we could add about 5% or 6%
hydrogen to a whole particle, we could, in fact,
convert it to liquid. And this doesn't sound like a
very difficult job, does it? It sounds easy. I
think it was these, and 80% of our hydrocarbon
reserves are certainly in the form of coal. So
there was every reason for the United States to
begin to point itself in the direction of making
oil from coal on first a basis that we might
ultimately run out of oil or get low on oil, and
second, maybe it offered economic
possibilities. Now, the economic possibilities
have been difficult to find and are still
difficult to find, but we may face the prospect
that we have to use our coal reserves to help
supplement our oil reserves. And this was the
basis that the Bureau of Mines got in on this thing.
And this explains why you're involved in it so
early. And I got involved in it, as I say, about 37 or
38, and my interest in it has been almost
continuous since that time. The first time we
picked you up in our work, we have you identified in
explosives. Now, how did we come up with that? That
was because I was assistant chief of the fuels and
explosives service. But I have done very little in
explosives, really. And I take it technically,
then, you were not ever really in the Army.
Technically, we were only put into the Army as
experts, not as full Army. I was never really a—we
were—what did they call us? Simulated colonels or
something like that. I've forgotten what— But we
actually wore uniforms over there and so on and so
forth. But I had no Army training nor no Army pay or
anything else. Now, when the Germans are
interviewed, they can't really distinguish
between yourselves and soldiers.
That is true. They really think that they're being
interviewed by the US Army all the way through. I
had never thought of that, but I think that is. So
that means a sizable number of the people involved
in Tom then were civilians. And not military
personnel? Well, they were all. Everybody was a
civilian. I wonder if any list of those people were
ever compiled. Yeah, I'm sure there were lists of
them. But where you'd find them, I don't know. I
could probably tell you 50 of them if I sat here and
thought a while about it.
And if you go through those reels and reports,
you'll find they're all authors of those reports.
Now, those people are essentially all civilians.
Now, there was another group of people over there.
There was a Navy team under Captain Pettyjohn who
also did a lot of interviewing, and there was some
rivalry between these two groups. It wasn't
serious, but there was some rivalry. Now, he's
retired to Florida. Yes, I think you're right.
Sarasota, Florida, that's the man we are. Yeah,
you want to talk to Petty John. Sarasota, Florida,
of course. This probably will give you a little
explanation of how this came about. Now, I would
like to say this about the Germans. As far as the
upper class of German technical people that we
knew, that we dealt with over there, many of those
we had corresponded with before the war and many of
those people knew that we were scientists and not
soldiers in any way shape or form you know and uh it
was a it was a rather strange situation uh uh we went
over and talked to people like dr hoobman from
lurgy and payer pier from uh from uh IG Farman and
people like that, they knew us well from previous
correspondence. And there was no problem, no
animosity between the groups that were involved
in most cases at all. And I had no feeling, really,
that I was a soldier of a conquered country or
anything like that. And I think 99% of our people
would have never even thought of that, you know. It
was just colleagues? We were scientists speaking
to scientists. That was the story. And that we
happened to be on one side and they happened to be on
another side, probably it was incidental to the
whole... Were the Germans further ahead in
technology than you anticipated them being?
Well, no, I don't think so. In the sense that we had
read about their technology and knew about their
technology, but... The truth is that we had no real
plant technology on synthetic fuels in this
country. We had laboratory technology. But they
were the only ones who really had gone ahead with
this plant technology. Now, as the
investigations went on, we got into every aspect
of this. And as you realize, these are very complex
and very large, very complex plants, very high
pressure plants. And so we had had teams which
dealt with preparing the coal for the plants,
feeding the coal to the plants, generating
hydrogen for the plants, the hydrogenation step
itself, and so on and so forth. So there were dozens
of reports that would cover various aspects of the
whole operation.
We were well into this, and this investigation ran
over a period of about six to eight months.
Actually, we got into Germany. I think the first
trip I made to Germany was either January or
February. Oh, you were in there even as the Allied
armies were pouring in. Yes, before the war was
over. And in fact, we were into Rhein-Preuysen,
which was one of the Fisch-Tropsch plans. The
Germans were still on the other side of the river.
There were still shells coming into the plants.
Not heavily. I wouldn't say we were in any danger or
anything like that. But we were investigating in
there. And in the evenings, trying to write
reports and get our notes together and organize as
best we could. That was early. Early 1945, because
it was cold, the buildings were no heat in the
buildings and no water to take a bath or anything
like that, we did the best we could. That's all
there was to it. And the investigations then went
on to about the middle or the autumn of that year
after the war was over, and reports were still
being issued. I stayed there until about... I
guess about June. I remember when Roosevelt died
and Truman took over. I listened to that speech in
London. And then a couple of weeks later, I came
back. So that would have been the latter part of May
that I came back.
Now, I ought to mention one other thing that was two
or three other things that were done. We
collected all the data and documents that we
possibly could from the German plants.
We wrote all the reports that we could, and
oftentimes the teams that got together and
analyzed these reports and made comments and
suggestions for for revisions, although under
conditions like this, you can't go into a detailed
report. You do the best you can with the time and
effort that you've got available. And then, as the
end of this investigating period approached,
I don't know where the suggestion came from, but it
had generated, I think, in a number of areas,
We thought that it might be a good idea to enlist
the German engineers who had designed and worked
in the plants and built the plants to actually
write up their own story in German. And I think this
effort was paid for and organized by the Air Force,
as I remember it. those people, the German people,
then did set down and write up for the Air Force. And
I believe these reports came out of Dayton. Or
where is the Air Force? Right, that's in Dayton.
That's the Air Force Institute of Technology. And
some of those, particularly those reports, were
excellent on coal hydrogenation. And...
I
can't put my finger on mine at the moment because
they may be moved over here, but there were about 10
or 12 of those reports on coal hydrogenation
that were I'm sure I've got them. Here's Bureau of
Mines publication on synthetic liquid fuel. No,
those were our own publications, and I have those
here. But the German part, they're in black
covers.
Reports to the Department of Engineering
Research.
oh here they are I was looking for them watch your oh
I'm watching watch your I believe there were eight
or ten volumes of that but this is one of the volumes
you know and some of them dealt with chemistry and
some of them dealt with engineering and some of
them dealt with metallurgy and some of them dealt
with the plant structures and so on and so forth And
then they were all translated into English.
And you ought to have copies of those documents.
Oh, we'll get them. We'll get them. We'll get them.
You ought to have copies of those documents. We'll
find a way to... Let me ask you, while I'm looking at
this, would you say that these charts indicate the
reasonably accurate structure of how the
organization was developed?
How
are you
going to take all these tapes?
Well, you take a couple dozen tapes this time. I was
going to get about $2,500. That
would be too boxy.
How
do you get on a beep when you have a minute left?
I don't know how many feet run through there.
Because if it beeps at the end, I mean, you can be
halfway through a word.
Better, I guess, than not even knowing it stopped.
You've got time. You've got to open it a little.
in that interview with Walton Smith. My gosh, the
belly.